SOURCE_PAGES: page_0114.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


अथीच्यते महाप्राज्ञ! ध्यानं ध्येयस्य चिन्तनम् ।
बुधेरात्मपरैर्नित्यं जितप्राणेजितिद्धियैः ।। ५५।।

athīcyate mahāprājñaḥ! dhyānaṃ dhyeyasya cintanam |
budherātmaparairnityaṃ jitaprāṇejitiddhiyaiḥ || 55 ||

अथीच्यते (athīcyate), √ī-(ā)cyate, 3rd person singular, passive present indicative  
महाप्राज्ञः (mahāprājñaḥ), महाप्राज्ञ (mahāprājña), masculine singular nominative, tatpuruṣa compound  
ध्यानं (dhyānaṃ), ध्यान (dhyāna), neuter singular accusative  
ध्येयस्य (dhyeyasya), ध्येय (dhyeya), masculine singular genitive  
चिन्तनम् (cintanam), चिन्तन (cintana), neuter singular nominative or accusative  
बुधेः (budheḥ), बुध (budha), masculine singular genitive  
आत्मपरैः (ātmaparaiḥ), आत्मपर (ātmapara), masculine plural instrumental, bahuvrīhi compound  
नित्यं (nityaṃ), नित्य (nitya), neuter singular accusative or adverb  
जितप्राणे (jitaprāṇe), जितप्राण (jitaprāṇa), masculine singular locative, tatpuruṣa compound  
जितिद्धियैः (jitiddhiyaiḥ), जितिद्धि (jitiddhi), feminine plural instrumental, bahuvrīhi compound

"अथीच्यते" — "Now it is said" (passive voice, 3rd person singular present)  
"महाप्राज्ञः" — "O great wise one!" (vocative)  
"ध्यानं" — "meditation" (accusative as object of ध्येयस्य चिन्तनम्)  
"ध्येयस्य" — "of the object to be meditated upon" (genitive)  
"चिन्तनम्" — "the contemplation/thinking" (nominative or accusative, possibly appositive to ध्यानं)  
"बुधेः आत्मपरैः" — "by the wise who are self-devoted" (instrumental plural)  
"नित्यं" — "always" (adverb)  
"जितप्राणे" — "in whom the vital breath is conquered" (locative singular)  
"जितिद्धियैः" — "with conquered senses" (instrumental plural)

Now it is said, O great wise one! Meditation is the contemplation of the object of meditation.  
By those wise persons devoted to the self, always (practicing), whose life-force and senses are conquered.

Now, O great learned one, it is declared: meditation is the contemplation of the object to be meditated upon.  
It is practiced always by the wise devoted to the self, whose vital breath and senses have been conquered.
