SOURCE_PAGES: page_0144.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


चतुर्थप्रश्रत्तरे मुक्तिसाधननिरूपणम् १०७  
विहाय वेष्णवो द्रादशीमुपवसेदिति वाग्यार्थः। तुशब्दः पूर्वतिधिव्यावृत्यर्थः।  
द्रादशीमुपवसेदित्यत्र 'उपान्वध्याध्वसः' (१.४.४८) इति पाणिनीयसूत्र शुक्तव्यर्थस्य नेति वने  
उपवसतीतिवत् वार्तिकिन कर्मसज्ज्ञानिषेधाततत्र द्रादशीमित्यत्र कथं द्वितीयेति विचारे  
धातोरकर्मकत्वाद-कर्मकधातुयोगे देशः कालो भावो गन्तव्योऽध्वा कर्मसञ्ज्ञक इति  
वाच्यमिति वार्तिकिन कर्मसञ्ज्ञा द्वितीयेति गृहाण। अत्र वंशस्थच्छन्दः।  
शुद्धा दशम्या सुयुतेति भदभागेकादशी सा द्विविधा प्रबुध्यताम् ।  
वेधीऽपि बोध्यो द्विविधीऽरुणोदये सूर्योदये वा दशमीप्रवेशतः ।।७६ ।।

caturthapraśrattare muktisādhananirūpaṇam 107  
vihāya veṣṇavo drādaśīmupavasediti vāgārthaḥ। tuśabdaḥ pūrvatidhivyāvṛtyarthaḥ।  
drādaśīmupavasedityatra 'upānvadhyādvasaḥ' (1.4.48) iti pāṇinīyasūtra śuktavyarthasya neti vane  
upavasatītivat vārtikina karmasajjñāniṣedhātatatra drādaśīmityatra kathaṁ dvitīyeti vicāre  
dhātorakarmakatvāda-karmakadhātuyoge deśaḥ kālo bhāvo gantavyo'dhvā karmasaññaka iti  
vācyamiti vārtikina karmasañjñā dvitīyeti gṛhāṇa। atra vaṁśasthacchandaḥ।  
śuddhā daśamyā suyute iti bhadabhāgekādaśī sā dvividhā prabudhyatām ।  
vedhī'pi bodhyo dvividhī'ruṇodaye sūrodyaye vā daśamīpraveśataḥ ॥76 ॥

चतुर्थप्रश्रत्तरे (caturthapraśrattare) - चतुर्थ (ordinal numeral: fourth), प्रश्रत्तरे (prāśrattare, neuter, singular, locative) 'in the fourth question' (tatpuruṣa compound)  
मुक्तिसाधननिरूपणम् (muktisādhananirūpaṇam) - मुक्तिसाधन (mukti-sādhana, neuter compound noun: liberation means), निरूपणम् (nirūpaṇam, neuter, singular, nominative) 'exposition of the means to liberation' (bahuvrīhi compound)  
१०७ (107) - numeral  

विहाय (vihāya) - verb verbal noun (gerund), from पर्वर्तित verb "विहाय" 'having abandoned' (indeclinable)  
वेष्णवः (veṣṇavaḥ) - noun, masculine, singular, nominative 'the Vaiṣṇava (follower of Vishnu)'  
द्रादशीमुपवसेदिति (drādaśīmupavasediti) - compound: द्रादशीम् (drādaśīm, accusative singular feminine), उपवसेदिति (upavasediti, verb root उपवस् 'to fast', 3rd person singular optative active + इति quotative) 'he should fast on Dṛādaśī'  
वाग्यार्थः (vāgārthaḥ) - noun, masculine singular nominative 'meaning of the words'  
तुशब्दः (tuśabdaḥ) - tu (indeclinable, emphatic particle 'indeed'), शब्दः (śabdaḥ, masculine singular nominative) 'word'  
पूर्वतिधिव्यावृत्यर्थः (pūrvatidhivyāvṛtyarthaḥ) - compound: पूर्व (pūrva) 'previous', तिधि (tidhi) 'date/time', व्यावृत्य (vyāvṛti) 'omission' + अर्थः (arthaḥ) 'meaning' 'the meaning of the omission of the previous time (day/date)'  

द्रादशीमुपवसेदित्यत्र (drādaśīmupavasedityatra) - compound: 'at the statement "he should fast on Dradaśī"'  
'उपान्वध्याध्वसः' (upānvadhyādhvasaḥ) - verb form from उप + अन्वध् + अध्वस् roots, 3rd person singular active indicative present (quoted)  
(१.४.४८) (1.4.48) - reference to Pāṇini's Aṣṭādhyāyī 1.4.48  
इति (iti) - indeclinable, quotative particle 'thus'  
पाणिनीयसूत्र (pāṇinīyasūtra) - compound noun, masculine singular, nominative 'Pāṇini's aphorism'  
शुक्तव्यर्थस्य (śuktavyarthasya) - compound adjective genitive singular masculine 'of the sarcastic meaning'  
नेति (neti) - verb, 3rd person singular present indicative active 'does not lead to'  
वने (vane) - noun, masculine singular locative, 'in the forest'  

उपवसतीतिवत् (upavasatītivat) - compound: उपवसतीतिवत् (as if fasting)  
वार्तिकिन (vārtikina) - noun masculine singular nominative 'the commentator'  
कर्मसज्ज्ञानिषेधाततत्र (karmasajjñāniṣedhātatatra) - compound: कर्म (karma) 'action', सञ्ज्ञान (sajjñā) 'designation', निषेध (niṣedha) 'prohibition', अततत्र (adverb) 'there' = 'in that prohibition of action designation'  
द्रादशीमित्यत्र (drādaśīmityatra) - 'there at the word "Drā́daśī"'  
कथा (kathā) - interrogative adverb 'how'  
द्वितीयेति (dvitīyeti) - 'is the second' (ordinal)  
विचारे (vicāre) - noun masculine singular locative 'in the inquiry'  

धातोरकर्मकत्वात् (dhātorakarmakatvāt) - compound: 'from the verbal root being transitive'  
कर्मकधातुयोगे (karmakadhātuyoge) - compound: कर्मक (karmaka) 'object', धातु (dhātu) 'root', योग (yoga) 'combination' locative singular 'in the combination of root and object'  
देशः (deśaḥ) - noun masculine singular nominative 'place'  
कालः (kālaḥ) - noun masculine singular nominative 'time'  
भावः (bhāvaḥ) - noun masculine singular nominative 'state, condition'  
गन्तव्यः (gantavyaḥ) - adjective masculine singular nominative 'to be reached'  
अध्वा (adhvā) - noun feminine singular instrumental or masculine singular nominative 'path, way'  
कर्मसञ्ज्ञक (karmasaññaka) - compound adjective 'denoting the action'  
इति (iti) - indeclinable 'thus'  
वाच्यम् (vācyam) - verbal adjective neuter singular nominative 'to be spoken'  
इति (iti) - indeclinable 'thus'  
वार्तिकिन (vārtikin) - noun masculine singular nominative 'the commentator'  
कर्मसञ्ज्ञा (karmasañjñā) - feminine singular nominative 'designation of the action'  
द्वितीयेति (dvitīyeti) - 'is the second'  
गृहाण (gṛhāṇa) - imperative verb 'accept'  

अत्र (atra) - indeclinable 'here'  
वंशस्थच्छन्दः (vaṁśasthacchandaḥ) - compound noun masculine singular nominative 'the meter named Vaṁśastha'  

शुद्धा (śuddhā) - adjective feminine singular nominative 'pure'  
दशम्या (daśamyā) - adjective feminine singular nominative 'tenth' (feminine)  
सुयुतेति (suyuteti) - verb 3rd person singular present 'is connected'  
भदभागेकादशी (bhadabhāgekādśī) - compound feminine singular nominative 'Ekādaśī of auspicious portion'  
सा (sā) - pronoun feminine singular nominative 'she/it'  
द्विविधा (dvividhā) - adjective feminine singular nominative 'twofold'  
प्रबुध्यताम् (prabudhyatām) - optative mood verb 3rd person singular or imperative 'let it be understood'  

वेधीऽपि (vedhī'pi) - compound indeclinable 'also known or remarked'  
बोध्यो (bodhyō) - adjective nominative masculine or neuter singular 'to be known'  
द्विविधी (dvividhī) - adjective feminine singular nominative 'twofold'  
अरुणोदये (aruṇodaye) - noun feminine singular locative 'at dawn'  
सूर्योदये (sūrodyaye) - noun masculine singular locative 'at sunrise'  
वा (vā) - indeclinable 'or'  
दशमीप्रवेशतः (daśamīpraveśataḥ) - compound masculine singular ablative 'from the entry into the tenth (day)'  

Literal translation (with grammatical notes):  
"At the fourth question, the exposition of the means of liberation 107. Having abandoned, the Vaiṣṇava should fast on the Drādaśī, this is the meaning of the words. The word 'tu' is the meaning of previous omission of the date. At the statement 'he should fast on the Drādaśī', the Pāṇinian sūtra 'upānvadhyādvasaḥ' (1.4.48) does not lead to the meaning of the sarcastic reading in the forest. Like fasting, the commentator in that prohibition of action designation, at the word 'Drādaśī', in inquiry how it is second is considered. Because the root is transitive—in the combination of root and object—place, time, and state must be reached, or the way designating the action must be spoken, thus says the commentator. Accept that the designation of action is second. Here is the meter named Vaṁśastha. The pure tenth (tithi) connected is the Ekādaśī of the auspicious portion; this is twofold, let it be understood. Also Vedhī (established) is to be known as twofold at dawn or at sunrise, or from the entry into the tenth. (76)"  

Smooth English translation:  
"At the fourth inquiry, the exposition of the means to liberation, verse 107.  
Having abandoned all, the Vaiṣṇava should fast on Drādaśī; this is the meaning of the words. The particle 'tu' signifies the omission relating to the previous calendar date.  
Regarding the statement 'one should fast on Drādaśī', Pāṇini's sutra 'upānvadhyādvasaḥ' (1.4.48) does not support a sarcastic or irrelevant interpretation.  
Like fasting, the commentator notes that in this prohibition of action designation, the word 'Drādaśī' is examined to determine how it can be considered the second (day).  
Since the verbal root is transitive, in the combination of root and object, the notions of place, time, and state apply and must be understood, or the path that denotes the action is to be spoken; thus, the commentator declares the designation of the action is to be regarded as second.  
Here appears the meter named Vaṁśastha.  
The pure tenth lunar day, when joined suitably, is the Ekādaśī of the auspicious part; this division is twofold and should be understood accordingly.  
Also, what is known as Vedhī should be recognized as twofold, occurring either at dawn or sunrise, or from the entry into the tenth day." (76)
