SOURCE_PAGES: page_0240.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


ईश्वरस्याप्यभिमानद्रेषित्वादैन्यप्रियत्वाच्च' (२७) इत्युक्तम्। गुरूपदिष्टान् मन्ताञ्जपन्तो वासं
कुर्युरित्यत्र गुरूपदिष्टानिति परम्पराप्राप्ततया तेषामेवोष्टसाधकत्वात्। मन्त्रान्
श्रीरामतारकमन्तराजादीन्, द्रयादिसहिताभिप्रायेण बहुवचनम्। एेकान्तिकेन मन्त्ानुष्ठानेनापि
कालक्षेपविधेः सम्पूर्तिर्भवति, मन्वरजपस्य स्वाध्यायरूपत्वादिति भावः।
भक्त्यादियुक्तस्य तथाऽनहङ्कृतेर्महात्मनस्तस्य निदेशपालनम्।
उपायमेनं चरमं निरन्तरं सुवैष्णवो यं विदधात्वतद्धितः ।।१७२।।
* संवित्करः *
एेसे सदगुणसम्पन्न वेष्णव को, सर्वथा अभिमान एवं आलस्य से रहित होकर, आचार्योपदिष्ट
उपदेशों का पालन करना चाहिपए।
* पदपरामर्शः *
"महत्सेवां द्रारमाहु विमुक्तेः" इत्युक्तेः 'वयं तु हरिदासानां पादत्राणावलम्बकाः' (पद्यावव्वयां
५८) इति भावनया विधीयमानाया भागवतशेषवृत्तेश्वरमोपायत्वेन तदाधारेणापि कालक्षेपस्य
करणीयतामाह भक्तत्यादियुक्तस्येति। अयमुपायान्तरे निष्ठावान् सुवेष्णवः विष्णुदेवताको
वेष्णवो भवत्ययन्तु विष्णुदेवताकदेवताक इति तदुपाश्रयाश्रयत्वात् सुवेष्णवः, द्विर्बद्धं सुबद्धं
"वति' इत्युक्तेः। निदर्शनच्चात्र श्रीभरताधीनशत्रुघ्रचरितम्। भागवतशोषत्वस्य चरमोपायतां
मन्वानोऽतन्द्रितः प्रमादालस्यश्रमादिरहितोऽयमेव मुदुद्धारस्य चरम उपाय इति धिया तस्य
महात्मनो भागवतस्य निदेशपालनं तदधीनतया तदाज्ञानुसरणं विदधातु कुर्यादिति। तस्येति
पूर्वोक्तं निरभिमानं विविक्तसेविनं मन्रजापकं परामृशति -तस्य तादृशस्य वा। यश्च
भक्तत्यादियुक्तो भक्तिज्ञानवेराग्यादि-विशिष्टः सन्त्रप्यनहष्कृतिः स नूनं महात्मा, भगवानेव
सर्व कारयतीति तस्य विशदात्म-बोधसम्पत्ते।
तदर्थपुष्यप्रचयेन सन्ततं तथेव तन्सन्दिरमार्जनादिना ।
तदीयनामाभ्यसनेन तन्मनाः क्षिपेत्स कालं नितरां गतालसः ।। १७३।।

īśvarasyāpyabhimānadreṣitvādainyapriyatvācca' (27) ityuktam। gurūpadiṣṭān mantāñjapanto vāsaṃ
kuryurityatra gurūpadiṣṭāniti paramparāprāptatayā teṣāmevoṣṭasādhakatvāt। mantrān
śrīrāmātārakamantarājādīn, drayādisahitābhiprāyeṇa bahuvacanam। ekāntikena mantānuṣṭhānenāpi
kālakshepavidheḥ sampūrtiḥbhavati, manvarajapasya svādhyāyarūptvāditi bhāvaḥ।
bhaktyādiyuktasya tathā'nahaṅkṛtermahātmanastasya nideśapālanam।
upāyamenaṃ caramaṃ nirantaraṃ suvaiṣṇavo yaṃ vidadhātvataddhitaḥ ।।172।।
* saṃvitkaraḥ *
ese sadguṇasampanna veṣṇava ko, sarvathā abhimāna evaṃ ālasya se rahita hokar, ācāryopadiṣṭa
upadeśoṃ kā pālana karnā chāhipe।
* padaparāmarśaḥ *
"mahātsevāṃ drārāmāhu vimukteḥ" ityukteḥ 'vayaṃ tu haridāsānāṃ pādatrāṇāvalambakāḥ' (padyāvayyaṃ
58) iti bhāvanayā vidhīyamānāyā bhāgavatśeṣavṛtteśvaramopāyatvena tadādhāreṇāpi kālaksīpasya
kariṇīyatāmāha bhaktatyādiyuktasyeti। ayamupāyāntare niṣṭhāvān suvaeṣṇavaḥ viṣṇudevatāko
veṣṇavo bhavatyayantu viṣṇudevatākadevatāka iti tadupāśrayāśrayatvātsuvaeṣṇavaḥ, dvirbaddhaṃ subaddhaṃ
"vati' ityukteḥ। nidarśanaccātra śrībharatādhīnaśatrughracaritam। bhāgavatśoṣatvasya caramopāyatāṃ
manvānottandritaḥ pramādālasyaśramādirahito'yameva mududdhārasya carama upāya iti dhiyā tasya
mahātmano bhāgavatasya nideśapālanaṃ tadadhīnatayā tadājñānusaraṇaṃ vidadhātu kuryāditi। tasyeṭi
pūrvoktaṃ nirabhimānaṃ viviktasevinaṃ manrajāpakaṃ parāmṛśati -tasya tādṛśasya vā। yaśca
bhaktatyādiyukto bhaktijñānaverāgyādi-viśiṣṭaḥ santrapy-anahaṣkṛtiḥ sa nūnaṃ mahātmā, bhagavāneva
sarva kārayatīti tasya viśadātma-bodhasampatte।
tadarthapuṣyapracayena santataṃ tatheva tansasṃdiramārjanādina ।
tadīyanāmabhyasena tanmanāḥ kṣipets kālaṃ nitarāṃ gatālasaḥ ।। 173।।

ईश्वरस्य (īśvarasya) ईश्वर (īśvara) - masculine, singular, genitive (possessive)  
अपि (api) अपि (api) - indeclinable, particle, "also"  
अभिमान (abhimāna) अभिमान (abhimāna) - masculine, singular, nominative  
द्रेषित्वाद् (dreṣitvāda) द्रेषित्व (dreṣitva) + आद् (āda) - abstract noun/participle + suffix, instrumental, singular (from causing displeasure/excessive ego) [compound]  
ऐन्यप्रियत्वात् च (ainyapriyatvāts ca) ऐन्यप्रियत्व (ainyapriyatva) - noun, instrumental, singular (dislikeness/disfavor) + च (ca) - indeclinable conjunction "and"  
' (') - punctuation mark   
(२७) (27) - verse number  
इति (iti) इति - indeclinable particle, "thus"  
उक्तम् (uktam) उक् (uc) + त (ta) - verbal root + past participle, neuter, singular, nominative (said/reported)  
गुरू (gurū) गुरु (guru) - masculine, plural, accusative (teachers)  
अपदिष्टान् (padiṣṭān) पदिṣ्ठ (padiṣṭa) - past participle, masculine, plural, accusative (commanded)  
मन्तान् (mantān) मन् (man) + tān, masculine plural accusative (chants/mantras)  
जपन्तः (japantaḥ) जप (jap) + antaḥ (present participle), masculine, plural, nominative (chanting)  
वासम् (vāsaṃ) वास (vāsa) - masculine, singular, accusative (residence/abode)  
कुर्युर्हि (kuryurhi) कृत् (kṛ) + युर्दिति (yur diti) - verb, optative mood, 3rd person plural (should do)  
अत्र (atra) अत्र - indeclinable, "here"  
गुरूपदिष्टानि (gurūpadiṣṭāni) गुरु (guru) + अप + दिष्टानि (padiṣṭāni) - past participle, neuter plural accusative (commands of the guru)  
ति (ti) part of iti, enclitic particle  
परम्परा (paramparā) परम्परा (paramparā) - feminine, singular, instrumental (tradition/sequence)  
प्राप्ततया (prāptatayā) प्राप्त (prāpta) - past participle, feminine singular instrumental (having obtained)  
तेषाम् (teṣām) तेषाम् (teṣām) - pronoun, masculine plural, genitive (of those)  
एव (eva) एव (eva) - indeclinable particle, "only/exactly"  
ओष्टसाधकत्वात् (oṣṭasādhatvāt) ओष्ट-साधकत्व (oṣṭa-sādhatva) - noun, instrumental singular (due to the ability to accomplish)  
मन्त्रान् (mantrān) मन्त्र (mantra) - masculine plural accusative (mantras)  
श्रीरामतारकमन्तराजादीन् (śrīrāmātārakamantarājādīn) श्रीराम (śrīrāma) + तारक (tāraka) + मन्तराज (mantarāja) + आदीन् (ādīn) - masculine plural accusative (names including Śrī Rāma, Tāraka, Mantarāja, etc.)  
द्रयादि (drayādi) द्रयादि (drayādi) - indeclinable compound (etc., etc.)  
सहिताभिप्रायेण (sahitābhiprāyeṇa) सहित (sahita) + अभिप्रायेण (abhiprāyeṇa) - instrumental singular (with the intention combined)  
बहुवचनम् (bahuvacanam) बहुवचन (bahuvacana) - neuter singular accusative (plural)  
एकान्तिकेन (ekāntikena) एकान्तिक (ekāntika) - masculine singular instrumental (exclusive/dedicated)  
मन्तानुष्ठानेन (mantānuṣṭhānena) मन्त्र + अनु + ष्ठान (anuṣṭhāna) - masculine singular instrumental (performance of mantras)  
अपि (api) अपि - indeclinable particle, "also"  
कालक्षेपविधेः (kālakshepavidheḥ) काल (kāla) + क्षेप (kṣepa) + विधि (vidhi) - feminine singular genitive (method of passing time)  
सम्पूर्तिः (sampūrtiḥ) सम्पूर्तिः (sampūrti) - feminine singular nominative (completion)  
भवति (bhavati) भव् (bhū) - verb present indicative 3rd singular (becomes)  
मन्वरजपस्य (manvarajapasya) मन्व (manva) + रजप (rajapa) + यस्य (of) - masculine singular genitive (of the mental repetition of the mantra)  
स्वाध्यायरूपत्वात् (svādhyāyarūptvāt) स्वाध्याय (svādhyāya) + रूपत्व (rūptva) - noun, instrumental singular (due to its being of the nature of self-study)  
इति (iti) इति - particle (thus)  
भावः (bhāvaḥ) भाव (bhāva) - masculine singular nominative (meaning/sense)  
भक्त्यादियुक्तस्य (bhaktyādiyuktasya) भक्ति (bhakti) + आदि (ādi) + युक्त (yukta) - masculine singular genitive (endowed with devotion, etc.)  
तथा (tathā) तथा - indeclinable particle, "also"  
अनहङ्कृतस्य (anahaṅkṛtasya) अन् + अहङ्कृत (ahaṅkṛta) - masculine singular genitive (non-egotistical)  
महात्मनस् (mahātmanas) महात्मन् (mahātman) - masculine singular genitive (of the great soul)  
तस्य (tasya) तस्य (tad) - masculine singular genitive (of him)  
निदेशपालनम् (nideśapālanam) निदेश (nideśa) + पालन (pālana) - neuter singular nominative/accusative (observance of instructions)  
उपायमेनम् (upāyamenaṃ) उपाय (upāya) + एन् (enaṃ) - masculine singular instrumental (by this means)  
चरमं (caramaṃ) चरम (carama) - neuter singular accusative (ultimate/final)  
निरन्तरं (nirantaraṃ) निरन्तर (nirantara) - neuter singular accusative (continuous)  
सुवैष्णवः (suvaiṣṇavaḥ) सु + वैष्णव (vaiṣṇava) - masculine singular nominative (devotee of Vishnu)  
यं (yaṃ) य (ya) - relative pronoun, neuter singular accusative (whom)  
विदधात् (vidadhāt) विधा (vidhā) - verb, optative/imperfect 3rd singular (may perform/do)  
वततद्धितः (vatataddhitaḥ) - verbal suffix form, verbal adjective (causal or resultant)  

Lord’s ego also through anger and disfavor (27) thus said. Chanting the mantras commanded by the guru, dwelling (while chanting) they should do; here, by tradition having obtained, because of their exclusive ability to perform. Mantras including Śrī Rāma, Tāraka, Mantarāja, and others, with intention and plural form. Even by exclusive mantra performance, the completion of the method of passing time is achieved, as the repetition of mantra is like self-study, thus is the meaning. The observance of instructions of one endowed with devotion and without ego, the great soul. By this means, continuously, the ultimate should be performed by a good Vaiṣṇava.

Such a virtuous Vaiṣṇava, completely free from ego and laziness, should follow the instructions taught by the teacher.

"It is said, 'Great service for the liberated ones,' with the sentiment 'We are indeed servants of Hari’s feet' (in verse 58), applying this for the purpose of Bhagavata meditation and time-passing. By this method the dedicated Vaiṣṇava, endowed with faith, may become a servant of Vishnu deity, and serving Vishnu deity and others is relying on the refuge; thus firmly established. This is demonstrated in the Śrībharata's Shatrughna-charita. Having accepted the ultimate method to overcome Bhagavata dryness (lack of devotional force), free from negligence, laziness, fatigue etc., thus is the final method of delivery; with such understanding the great soul diligently observes the Bhagavata’s instructions and follows them obediently. This said ego-less, secluded practitioner and mantra chanter – thus describes such a person. One who is endowed with devotion and distinguished by devotion, knowledge, dispassion etc., with controlled mind and non-attachment is indeed a great soul who does all service to the Lord. Such clarity of self-knowledge is obtained.

By the continuance of this fortunate practice, continuously by thorough cleansing and study,
By repeated practice of this, one’s mind should cast away time utterly lazy and gone.

Lord’s ego also through anger and disfavor (27) thus said. Chanting the mantras commanded by the guru, dwelling (while chanting) they should do; here, by tradition having obtained, because of their exclusive ability to perform. Mantras including Śrī Rāma, Tāraka, Mantarāja, and others, with intention and plural form. Even by exclusive mantra performance, the completion of the method of passing time is achieved, as the repetition of mantra is like self-study, thus is the meaning. The observance of instructions of one endowed with devotion and without ego, the great soul. By this means, continuously, the ultimate should be performed by a good Vaiṣṇava.

A Vaiṣṇava endowed with good qualities, completely free from pride and laziness, should always follow the instructions given by the teacher.

"It is said, 'Great service for the liberated ones,' and with the feeling, 'We are the supporters of the servants of Hari’s feet' (verse 58). By this sentiment and Bhagavata devotion as a remedy to alleviate dryness of devotion, the time-passing must be done. By this means, a faithful Vaiṣṇava becomes a servant of the deity Vishnu, as he depends fully on Vishnu deity—therefore he is a true Vaiṣṇava, firmly established. This is demonstrated in the story of Śrī Bharata under Shatrughna. A person determined to apply the ultimate method against dryness, free from negligence, laziness, and fatigue, is the very method of liberation. With this understanding, the great soul diligently observes Bhagavata's instructions under obedience and practices accordingly. Thus, an ego-less, secluded servant who chants mantras is described. One endowed with devotion, knowledge, dispassion, and distinguished by these qualities, free from pride and with a controlled mind is certainly a great soul who performs all service to Bhagavan. This leads to clear self-knowledge.

By constant practice of such auspicious efforts, by continuous cleaning and striving,
By repeated study and practice, the mind should entirely cast away the long-passed time of laziness.
