SOURCE_PAGES: page_0092.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


वाक्यार्थः प्राप्यसम्बन्धिस्वरूपाभिनिरूपणम् ।।३१।।
तारकस्य प्राधानार्थस्वस्वरूपनिरूपणम् ।
सम्बन्धस्यानुसन्धानमनुसन्ध्यर्थ इष्यते ।।३२।।

vākyārthaḥ prāpyasambandhisvarūpābhinirūpaṇam ।।31।।
tārakasya prādhānārthasvasvarūpanirūpaṇam ।
sambandhasyānusandhānamanusandhyartha iṣyate ।।32।।

वाक्यार्थः (vākyārthaḥ), vākyārtha, masculine singular nominative, compound: tatpuruṣa (vākyārtha: sentence-meaning)
प्राप्यसम्बन्धिस्वरूपाभिनिरूपणम् (prāpyasambandhisvarūpābhinirūpaṇam), prāpyasambandhi-svarūpa-abhinirūpaṇam, neuter singular nominative, compound: bahuvrīhi (composed of prāpya (obtained), sambandhi (relation), svarūpa (essence), abhinirūpaṇam (delineation))
तारकस्य (tārakasya), tāraka, masculine singular genitive (of the star)
प्राधानार्थस्वस्वरूपनिरूपणम् (prādhānārthasvasvarūpanirūpaṇam), prādhānārtha-sva-svarūpa-nirūpaṇam, neuter singular nominative, compound: tatpuruṣa (prādhānārtha (principal purpose), sva (own), svarūpa (essence), nirūpaṇam (explanation))
सम्बन्धस्यानुसन्धानमनुसन्ध्यर्थ (sambandhasyānusandhānamanusandhyartha), sambandha (relation) + syā (genitive singular) + anusandhānam (search/investigation) + anusandhyartha (purpose of investigation), neuter singular nominative
इष्यते (iṣyate), verb root iṣ (to wish), 3rd person singular present passive indicative (or middle voice, depending on context)

"वाक्यार्थः" — sentence-meaning (subject)
"प्राप्यसम्बन्धिस्वरूपाभिनिरूपणम्" — delineation of the nature (essence) of the relation which is to be obtained
"तारकस्य" — of the star (genitive)
"प्राधानार्थस्वस्वरूपनिरूपणम्" — explanation of the star's own essence with respect to the principal purpose
"सम्बन्धस्यानुसन्धानमनुसन्ध्यर्थ" — the searching/investigation of the relation, for the purpose of inquiry
"इष्यते" — (it) is intended/wished

Literal translation:
The sentence-meaning (vākyārthaḥ) [is] the delineation (nirūpaṇam) of the nature of the relation to be obtained (prāpyasambandhisvarūpa), (verse 31).
Of the star (tārakasya), the explanation (nirūpaṇam) of its own essence with respect to the principal purpose (prādhānārtha-svasvarūpa).
The investigation/search (anusandhānam) of the relation (sambandhasya), for the purpose of inquiry (anusandhyartha), is intended (iṣyate). (verse 32)

Smooth English translation:
The sentence-meaning is the detailed delineation of the nature of the relation to be attained.  
Concerning the star, there is an explanation of its own essence in relation to the principal purpose.  
The investigation of the relation is undertaken for the sake of inquiry.
