SOURCE_PAGES: page_0241.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


मार्जनादिना भगवदालयस्य मार्जनेन पूजनपात्रप्रक्षालनेन यथाधिकारं जलाहरणादिना,
भगवत्सपर्यर्थं पुष्पप्रचयेनाभिमतकुसुमाहरणेन तदीयनामाभ्यसनेनाविच्छिन्ननामोच्ारणेन
नितरामल्यन्तं तन्मनाः भगवत्येव मनो यस्य, भगवति निरतिशय प्रीतिमान् सन् कालं
क्षिपेदतिवाहयेत्तेन कालक्षेपो विधीयत इति भावः। तन्मना इति मन्मना भवेति
'गवदुक्तत्यपेक्षाभिप्रायेणोक्तम्।
तीर्थेषु वासेन सतां महात्मनां समागमेनाथ तदर्चनेन ।
जिज्ञासया तद्यशसः श्रवेण तच्छरावणेन स्मरणेन तस्य ।।१७४।।
* संवित्करः *
वेष्णवों के लिए तीर्थी मेँ वास, महात्माओं की संगति एवं उनकी सर्वविध सेवा, भगवद्विषयक
जिज्ञासा, भगवद्यशोगाथा का श्रवण, दूसरों को भगवच्यरित सुनाना तथा भगवद्िषयक
चिन्तन करना ही कालक्षेप का सर्वोत्तम साधन हे।
* पदपरामर्शः *
कालक्षेपः कथं कार्य इत्यपेक्षायां सप्तभिस्तृतीयान्तैः साधनमालामेकेन पहोन सङ्गृह्याह -
तीर्थेषु वासेनेत्यादिना। अयोध्यामधुराकाश्यादिपुण्यतीर्थषु वासेन,
पुण्यनदीस्रानभगवद्धागवतदर्शनाद्युपलब्धेः, सतां शास्तज्ञानां वेष्णवजनानामर्चनेन सविधि
पूजनेन, प्रसन्नेषु च तेषु तत्वविषयकजिज्ञासया परिप्रश्रन तदुक्तानां भगवद्यशसा श्रवेण श्रद्धया
श्रवणेन, श्रुत्वा च समीपवर्तिषु श्रीतृषु भगवद्गुणश्रावणेन, तदिदं भगवद्यशः श्रवणकथनादेः
सञ्चातेन भगवत्स्मरणेन वेष्णवः कालं क्षिपेदिति पूर्वक्रियान्वयः। अत्र सर्वेषां साधनानां
भगवत्स्मरणे पर्यवसानं द्योतितम्। एवं तीर्थानां कालक्षेपानुगुणप्रचुर-
सामग्रीसम्भ॑तत्वं सूच्यते ।
रामस्य साङ्गस्य सपार्षदस्य सीतासमेतस्य सहानुजस्य ।
कैङ्कर्यमीर्य्यारहितः प्रकुर्वन् क्षिपेत्स्वकालं सततं सुभक्तः ।।१७५।।

mārjanādinā bhagavadālayasya mārjanena pūjanapātraprakṣālanena yathādhikāraṃ jalāharaṇādinā,
bhagavatsaparyarthaṃ puṣpapracayenābhimatakusumāharaṇena tadīyanāmābhyasanenāvicchinnanāmocāraṇena
nitārāmalyaṃ tanmanāḥ bhagavatyeva mano yasya, bhagavati niratiśaya prītimān san kālaṃ
kṣipedativāhayettena kālakṣepo vidhīyata iti bhāvaḥ। tanmanā iti manmanā bhaveti
'gavaduktatyapekṣābhiprāyeṇoktamoktam।
tīrtheṣu vāsen satāṃ mahātmanāṃ samāgamenaatha tadarcanena ।
jijñāsayā tadyaśasaḥ śraveṇa taccharāvaṇena smaraṇena tasya ।।174।।
* saṃvitkaraḥ *
veṣṇavoṃ ke liye tīrthī meṃ vās, mahātmāoṃ kī saṅgati evam unakī sarvavidha sevā, bhagavadviṣayaka
jijñāsā, bhagavadyashogāthā kā śravaṇ, dūsrõ ko bhagavacyarita sunānā tathā bhagavadviṣayaka
cintana karnā hī kālakṣepa kā sarvottama sādhana he।
* padaparāmarśaḥ *
kālakṣepaḥ kathaṃ kārya ityapekṣāyāṃ saptabhistṛtīyāntaiḥ sādhnamālāmekena pahona saṅgṛhyāha -
tīrtheṣu vāsenetyādinā। ayodhyāmadhurākāśyādipuṇyatīrthaṣu vāsen,
puṇyanadīsrānabhagavaddhāgavatadarśanādyupalabdheḥ, satāṃ śāstajñānāṃ veṣṇavajanānāmarcanena savidhi
pūjanena, prasanneṣu ca teṣu tattvaviṣayakajijñāsayā paripraśrana taduktānāṃ bhagavadyaśasā śreṇḍhayā
śravaṇena, śrutvā ca samīpavartiṣu śrītṛṣu bhagavadguṇaśrāvaṇena, tadidaṃ bhagavadyashaḥ śravaṇakathanādeḥ
sañcātena bhagavatsmaraṇena veṣṇavaḥ kālaṃ kṣipediti pūrvakriyānwayaḥ। atra sarveṣāṃ sādhānāṃ
bhagavatsmaraṇe paryavasānaṃ dyotitam। evaṃ tīrthānāṃ kālakṣepānuguṇapracura-
sāmagrīsaṃbhatatvaṃ sūcyate ।
rāmasya sāṅgasya sapārṣadasya sītāsametasya sahānujasya ।
kaikaṅkaryamīryyārahitaḥ prakurvan kṣipetsvakālaṃ satataṃ subhaktaḥ ।।175।।

मार्जनादिना (mārjanādinā) - मार्जन (mārjana) n.m. 'cleaning'; अदि (adi) indeclinable 'and others'; णा (nā) suffix in instrumental singular; instrumental singular neuter, indeclinable compound (bahuvrīhi)
भगवदालयस्य (bhagavadālayasya) - भगवदालय (bhagavadālaya) n.m. 'temple of the Lord'; genitive singular masculine
मार्जनेन (mārjanena) - मार्जन (mārjana) n.m. 'cleaning'; instrumental singular masculine
पूजनपात्रप्रक्षालनेन (pūjanapātraprakṣālanena) - पूजन (pūjana) m. 'worship'; पात्र (pātra) n. 'vessel'; प्रक्षालन (prakṣālana) n. 'washing'; instrumental singular masculine; compound tatpuruṣa (पूजनपात्र + प्रक्षालन)
यथाधिकारं (yathādhikāraṃ) - यथा (yathā) indeclinable 'according to'; अधिकार (adhikāra) m. 'right, authority'; accusative singular masculine
जलाहरणादिना (jalāharaṇādinā) - जलाहरण (jalāhāraṇa) m. 'fetching water'; आदि (ādi) indeclinable 'and others'; instrumental singular neuter
भगवत्सपर्यर्थं (bhagavatsaparyarthaṃ) - भगवत् (bhagavat) adj. 'Lord's'; स (sa) pronoun 'with'; पर्यर्थ (paryartha) n. 'purpose'; accusative singular neuter; compound tatpuruṣa or bahuvrīhi
पुष्पप्रचयेनाभिमतकुसुमाहरणेन (puṣpapracayenābhimatakusumāharaṇena) - पुष्पप्रचयेन (puṣpapracayena) instrumental singular masculine 'flower offering'; अभिमत (abhimata) adj. 'accepted'; कुसुमाहरणेन (kusumāharaṇena) instrumental singular masculine 'collecting flowers'; compound bahuvrīhi or tatpuruṣa
तदीयनामाभ्यसनेनाविच्छिन्ननामोच्ारणेन (tadīyanāmābhyasanenāvicchinnanāmocāraṇena) - तदीय (tadīya) pronoun 'his/their'; नाम (nāma) n. 'name'; अभ्यसन (abhyasana) n. 'practice'; अविछिन्न (avicchinna) adj. 'uninterrupted'; नामोच्‍ारण (nāmocāraṇa) n. 'pronunciation of name'; instrumental singular; compound bahuvrīhi or tatpuruṣa
नितरामल्यन्तं (nitārāmalyaṃ) - नितराम् (nitaraṃ) adv. 'very much'; अल्यम् (alyam) n. 'impurity'; accusative singular neuter
तन्मनाः (tanmanāḥ) - तत् (tat) pronoun 'that'; मनः (manaḥ) n. 'mind'; genitive singular neuter
भगवत्येव (bhagavatyeva) - भगवती (bhagavatī) f. 'Goddess'; एव (eva) indeclinable 'indeed'
मनो (mano) - मन (mana) n. 'mind'; nominative singular neuter
यस्म (yasya) - य: (yaḥ) pronoun 'who'; genitive singular masculine
भगवति (bhagavati) - भगवन् (bhagavan) m. 'Lord'; instrumental singular masculine
निरतिशय (niratiśaya) - निरतिशय (niratiśaya) adj. 'exceedingly'
प्रीतिमान् (prītimān) - प्रीति (prīti) f. 'pleasure'; मान् (mān) suffix 'having'; nominative singular masculine
सन् (san) - अस् (as) verb root 'being'; present participle masculine nominative singular active
कालं (kālaṃ) - काल (kāla) m. 'time'; accusative singular masculine
क्षिपेदतिवाहयेत् (kṣipedativāhayet) - क्षिप् (kṣip) root 'throw'; तत् (tat) pronoun 'that'; वा (vā) indeclinable 'or'; हयेत् (hayet) potential verb 'may carry'; third person singular
तेन (tena) - तत् (tat) pronoun 'that'; instrumental singular masculine
कालक्षेपः (kālākshepaḥ) - काल (kāla) m. 'time'; क्षेपः (kṣepaḥ) m. 'spending'; nominative singular masculine; compound tatpuruṣa
विधीयत (vidhīyata) - विधी (vidhī) impersonal verb root; optative mood third person singular passive; 'should be done'
इति (iti) - indeclinable 'thus'
भावः (bhāvaḥ) - भाव (bhāva) m. 'meaning, sentiment'; nominative singular masculine
तन्मना (tanmanā) - तत् (tat) pronoun 'that'; मन (mana) n. 'mind'; instrumental singular neuter
इति (iti) - indeclinable 'thus'
मन्मना (manmanā) - मन (mana) n. 'mind'; मना (manā) instrumental singular neuter
भवेत् (bhavet) - भव् (bhū) root verb 'become'; optative mood third person singular
गवदुक्तत्यपेक्षाभिप्रायेणोक्तम् (gavaduktatyapekṣābhiprāyeṇoktām) - compound word: गवदुक्त (gavadukta) 'spoken word'; तापेक्षा (tāpekṣā) 'expectation'; अभिप्राय (abhiprāya) 'intention'; उक्त (ukta) 'said'; indeclinable compound bahuvrīhi or tatpuruṣa
तीर्थेषु (tīrtheṣu) - तीर्थ (tīrtha) m. 'holy place'; locative plural masculine
वासेन (vāsenā) - वास (vāsa) m. 'residence'; instrumental singular masculine
सतां (satāṃ) - सत (sat) adj. 'good'; genitive plural masculine
महात्मनां (mahātmanāṃ) - महात्मा (mahātmā) m. 'great soul'; genitive plural masculine
समागमेनाथ (samāgamenaatha) - समागम (samāgama) m. 'meeting'; instrumental singular masculine; अथ (atha) indeclinable conjunction 'then'
तदर्चनेन (tadarcanena) - तत् (tat) pronoun 'that'; अर्चन (arcanā) n. 'worship'; instrumental singular neuter
जिज्ञासया (jijñāsayā) - जिज्ञासा (jijñāsā) f. 'inquiry'; instrumental singular feminine
तद्यशसः (tadyaśasaḥ) - तत् (tat) pronoun 'that'; यशस् (yaśas) m. 'fame'; genitive singular masculine
श्रवेण (śraveṇa) - श्रवण (śravaṇa) n. 'hearing'; instrumental singular neuter
तच्छरावणेन (taccharāvaṇena) - तत् (tat) pronoun 'that'; शरावण (śarāvaṇa) m. 'listening, hearing'; instrumental singular masculine
स्मरणेन (smaraṇena) - स्मरण (smaraṇa) n. 'remembrance'; instrumental singular neuter
तस्य (tasya) - तत् (tat) pronoun 'that'; genitive singular masculine

By cleaning the temple, cleaning and washing the worship vessels, and fetching water etc. duly,
For the sake of the Lord and with flower offerings, accepted and collecting flowers,
By practicing their uninterrupted name-pronunciation,
The mind, indeed that mind of the Goddess, who is very much impure,
Having the mind fixed on the Goddess who is exceedingly loving,
Throwing or carrying time by that (mind) — this is said to be the method of passing time.
Thus with that mind, one becomes mind-absorbed.
(It is said) 'given the expectation of the spoken words'.

In holy places, by residence,
By the company of good and great souls, and by that worship,
By inquiry,
By hearing their fame, by listening carefully, by remembrance of that.

For Vaishnavas, residence in pilgrimages, company of great souls, and their all kinds of services, the inquiry related to the Lord, hearing the glorious stories of the Lord, narrating the deeds of the Lord to others, and meditating on the Lord are the best means of passing time.

About how to pass time: On the expectation of this, seven sets of means ending in the third (term) are collected in one place —
Residence etc. in pilgrimages. In holy places like Ayodhya, Madhurākāśa, etc.,
Residence, obtained by viewing the Lord, rivers, wealth, and Bhagavata,
By worship with proper rituals of good and scripturally learned Vaishnavas,
By inquiry about the essentials, questioning, listening to the Lord's glory with faith,
By listening to the Lord's virtues near the good saints,
By the combination of hearing, narrating, and remembrance of the Lord,
The Vaishnava passes time — this is the sequence of the previous actions.
Here, the termination of all means lies in remembrance of the Lord.
Thus, the great abundance of material suitable to time-passing in pilgrimages is indicated.

Of Rama's companion, of the relative, along with Sita,
The devoted one, free from selfish desires, constantly engaged in performing services, passes his time.

By cleaning etc., by cleaning the vessels for worship accordingly, by fetching water,
for the Lord's sake, by offering flowers accepted and collecting them,
by the practice of their uninterrupted name-pronunciation,
the mind of that Goddess, who is very pure, whose mind indeed is devoted to the Goddess,
that mind who is exceedingly loving to the Goddess, throwing and carrying time by that mind —
this is said to be the method of passing time.
Thus, with that mind one becomes absorbed in mind.
'As stated by the expectation of spoken words'.

In pilgrimages, by residence,
by the company of good and great souls, and by their worship,
by inquiry,
by hearing their fame, by attentive listening, and by remembrance of that.

For Vaishnavas, residence in pilgrimages, the company of great souls, and their complete service,
inquiry regarding the Lord, hearing glorious stories about the Lord,
relating the deeds of the Lord to others, and meditating on the Lord
are the best means of passing time.

How to pass time: On this topic, a chain of seven means ending with third-term ones is gathered in one place—
by residence etc. in pilgrimages.
In holy places like Ayodhya and Madhuraakasha,
having residence, by the realization of holy rivers and Bhagavata darshana,
through worship with proper rituals of good and scripturally learned Vaishnavas,
by inquiry concerning the essence of things, questioning,
by listening to the Lord’s glory with faith,
by hearing and being near noble devotees,
by the hearing of the Lord’s virtues,
by hearing, narrating, remembrance of the Lord,
the Vaishnava passes time — this is the order of the previous actions.
Here the conclusion of all means is shown to be remembrance of the Lord.
Thus the abundance of materials suitable for passing time in pilgrimages is indicated.

Of Rama’s associate, his relative, along with Sita,
the devoted, free from selfishness,
engaged in service, passes his time constantly.
