SOURCE_PAGES: page_0125.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


८८ श्रीवैष्णवमतान्नभास्करः  
तप्तेन मूले पुजयोः समड्कनं शरेण चापेन तथीर्ध्वपुण्ड्कम् ।  
श्रुतिश्रुतं नाम च मन्तरमालिके संस्कारभेदाः परमार्थहेतवः ।। ६२ ॥।

88 śrīvaiṣṇavamatānnabhāskaraḥ  
taptena mūle pujayoḥ samaḍkanaṃ śareṇa cāpena tathīrdhvapuṇḍkam ।  
śrutiśrutaṃ nāma ca mantrmālike saṃskārabhedāḥ paramārthhetavaḥ । 62 ।

८८ — aṣṭottara (numeral)  
श्रीवैष्णवमतान्नभास्करः (śrīvaiṣṇavamatānnabhāskaraḥ) — 
  श्री (śrī), prefix denoting respect/honorific; वैष्णव (vaiṣṇava), adjective: relating to Viṣṇu; मत (mata), neuter noun (singular, nominative): doctrine/view; अन्न (anna), noun (neuter, singular, nominative): food/grain; भास्करः (bhāskaraḥ), noun (masculine, singular, nominative): sun — compound: tatpuruṣa (compositional compound: "śrī-vaiṣṇava-mata-anna-bhāskara" = "resplendent sun of the food of the Vaishnava doctrine")

तप्तेन (taptena) — root verb तप् (tap) past participle ablative singular masculine/neuter — "heated by"  
मूले (mūle) — noun मूल (mūla), neuter, singular, locative — "at the root/base"  
पुजयोः (pujayoḥ) — noun पूजा (pujā), feminine, dual, genitive/dative — "of the two worships" / "to the two worships"  
समड्कनं (samaḍkanaṃ) — noun समड्कन (samaḍkana), neuter, singular, accusative — likely a ritual object or substance (uncertain)  
शरेण (śareṇa) — noun शर (śara), masculine, singular, instrumental — "with an arrow"  
चापेन (cāpena) — noun चाप (cāpa), masculine, singular, instrumental — "with a bow"  
तथीर्ध्वपुण्ड्कम् (tathīrdhvapuṇḍkam) — compound word; त्वथ (tatha), adverb: "thus" + ईर्ध्व (īrdhva) directional prefix: "upwards" + पुण्ड (puṇḍ), possibly related to "lump" or specific ritual term; neuter noun, accusative singular — exact meaning unclear, likely a ritual object or place

श्रुतिश्रुतं (śrutiśrutaṃ) — compound of श्रुति (śruti) and श्रुत (śruta), neuter, singular, accusative — "heard and re-heard" (strongly established by hearing)  
नाम (nāma) — indeclinable — "namely" / "called"  
च (ca) — indeclinable — "and"  
मन्तरमालिके (mantramālike) — noun मंत्रमालिका (mantramālikā), feminine, singular, locative — "in the garland of mantras"  
संस्कारभेदाः (saṃskārabhedāḥ) — noun संस्कारभेद (saṃskārabheda), masculine, plural, nominative — "differences in rites/ceremonies"  
परमार्थहेतवः (paramārthhetavaḥ) — compound of परम (parama), अर्थ (artha), हेतुव (hetu) plus masculine plural nominative ending; "causal/essential reasons of the ultimate meaning"

Literal translation:  
"88. The resplendent sun of the food of the Vaishnava doctrine,  
heated at the base, [related to] the two worships’ samaḍkana, with arrow and bow, likewise the tathīrdhva puṇḍka.  
The heard and re-heard, namely in the garland of mantras, the differences in rites are the causes of the ultimate meaning."

Smooth English translation:  
"88. The radiant source of the food of the Vaishnava doctrine,  
heated at its root, associated with the two worships’ ritual offerings, with arrow and bow, likewise the tathīrdhva puṇḍka.  
The teachings repeatedly heard—namely, in the garland of mantras—these differing rites are the causes of the ultimate truth."
