SOURCE_PAGES: page_0221.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


भागवताः केवलाश्च कादाचित्का अपि द्विधा ।
तत्र भागवता बोध्या ये तेषु भगवत्पराः ।।१५५।।
भगवद्धोग्यभूत्यादिसाक्षात्कारसुखाश्रयाः ।
श्रीराममानसा नित्यं तदनुध्यानतत्पराः ।।१५६।।
केचिद् गुणानुसन्धानपराः कैडकर्यतत्पराः ।
इत्थं महर्षिभिः प्रोक्ता द्विविधा भगवत्पराः ।।१५७।।
द्विविधा केवला बोध्या दुःखभावैकतत्पराः ।
आत्सानुभूतिपरमा इति चोक्ता महर्षिभिः ।।१५८।।

bhāgavatāḥ kevalāśca kādācitkā api dvidhā |
tatra bhāgavatā bodhyā ye teṣhu bhagavatparāḥ ||155||
bhagavaddhogyabhūtyādisākṣātkārasukhāśrayāḥ |
śrīrāmamāsanā nityaṃ tadanudhyānatatparāḥ ||156||
kechid guṇānusandhānaparāḥ kaiḍakaryatatparāḥ |
itthaṃ maharṣibhiḥ proktā dvidhā bhagavatparāḥ ||157||
dvidhā kevalā bodhyā duḥkhabhāvaikatatatparāḥ |
ātsānubhūtiparamā iti coktā maharṣibhiḥ ||158||

bhāgavatāḥ (bhāgavata, masc. pl. nom.): devotees, devotees of Bhagavān  
kevalāḥ (kevala, masc. pl. nom.): only, alone; here adjectival  
ca (ca, indecl.): and  
kādācitkā (kādācit + kā, indecl.): at some time; kādācit = at some time, particle  
api (api, indecl.): also, even  
dvidhā (dvidhā, fem. sg. nom.): in two ways  

tatra (tatra, indecl.): there  
bhāgavatā (bhāgavata, masc. pl. abl.): by devotees  
bodhyā (bodhya, fem. pl. nom. or fem. pl. voc. or neut. pl. nom/acc/voc. gerundive, part.): to be known, to be understood (gerundive, fem. pl. nom., agreeing with ye)  
ye (ye, pron. masc. pl. nom.): who  
teṣhu (teṣu, pron. masc. pl. loc.): in them  
bhagavatparāḥ (bhagavatpara, masc. pl. nom.): devoted to Bhagavān (bhagavat + para = devoted, compound tatpuruṣa)  

bhagavatdhhogya-bhūtyādi-sākṣāt-kāra-sukhā-śrayāḥ (compound tatpuruṣa and bahuvrīhi): those who rely on immediate enjoyment (sākṣātkāra - immediate perception, sukhāśraya - shelter of happiness, bhūti - prosperities, dhogya - (probably a compound, here meaning 'objects of enjoyment'))  
śrīrāma-mānasa-nityaṃ (compound tatpuruṣa): with mind devoted constantly to Śrī Rāma  
tad-anudhyāna-tatparāḥ (tad + anudhyāna + tatparāḥ): devoted to constant meditation on that  

kechid (kecid, indecl.): some  
guṇa-anusandhāna-parāḥ (compound tatpuruṣa): devoted to investigation of qualities  
kaiḍa-karya-tatparāḥ = kaiḍakarya-tatparāḥ (kaiḍa-karya uncertain; possibly kaiḍa-karya = 'hard tasks' or 'difficult actions' tatparāḥ = devoted to)  
ittham (ittham, indecl.): thus  
maharṣibhiḥ (maharṣi, masc. pl. inst.): by great sages  
proktā (prokta, fem. pl. nom.): spoken  
dvidhā (dvidhā, fem. sg. nom.): twofold  
bhagavatparāḥ (bhagavatpara, masc. pl. nom.): devoted to Bhagavān  

dvidhā (dvidhā, fem. sg. nom.): twofold  
kevalā (kevala, fem. sg. nom.): only  
bodhyā (bodhya, fem. sg. nom. gerundive): to be understood, knowable  
duḥkhabhāva-eka-tatparāḥ: devoted to only the feeling of sorrow (compound tatpuruṣa)  
ātsānubhūti-paramā (ātsānubhūti + paramā, fem. sg. nom. superlative): supreme in self-experience  
iti (iti, indecl.): thus  
coktā (cokta, fem. sg. nom.): spoken  
maharṣibhiḥ (maharṣi, masc. pl. inst.): by great sages  

Devotees are either solely (kevalaḥ) or sometimes (kādācit) twofold (dvidhā).  
There, those to be understood by devotees, who among them are devoted to Bhagavān.  
Dependent on immediate perceptions of enjoyments, prosperities, etc.,  
Constantly with mind devoted to Śrī Rāma, devoted to meditation on that:  
Some are devoted to investigation of qualities, some devoted to difficult actions.  
Thus have the great sages spoken: twofold are the Bhagavat-paras.  
Twofold, only (kevala) to be known: those devoted solely to the state of sorrow.  
The supreme one in self-experience. Thus spoken by the great sages.

Devotees are of two kinds, either solely or sometimes in two ways.  
Among them, some are devoted to immediate pleasures and worldly prosperity,  
While others are constantly absorbed in meditation on Śrī Rāma with their mind.  
Some are devoted to studying qualities; others to arduous tasks.  
Thus, the great sages declare, there are two kinds of devotees.  
The two kinds to be understood are those devoted only to sorrow,  
And those supreme in self-realization. Thus have the great sages said.
