SOURCE_PAGES: page_0102.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


वाक्यार्था मन्तरलस्य त्वथ निर्णीयते बुधः ।।४२।।

vākyarthā mantaralasya tvatha nirṇīyate budhaḥ ।।42।।

vākārthā (vāk + artha, tatpuruṣa; nominative singular feminine),
mantaralasya (mantarala, genitive singular masculine),
tvatha (indecodable particle),
nirṇīyate (nirṇīy-, present passive, third singular),
budhaḥ (budha, nominative singular masculine).

"The meaning (artha) of the word (vāk) of the mantra-layer (mantarala; genitive) is then (tvatha) decided (nirṇīyate) by the wise (budhaḥ)."

"The wise then determine the meaning of the mantra-text."

प्राप्यप्रापकसम्बन्धस्वरूपाभिनिरूपणम् ।

prāpyaprapakasambandhasvarūpābhinirūpaṇam ।

prāpya (gerund of prāptum, verbal noun),
aprapaka (aprapaka, noun; accusative singular masculine),
sambandha (sambandha, compound noun, tatpuruṣa),
svarūpa (svarūpa, compound noun),
abhinirūpaṇam (abhinirūpaṇam, nominative singular neuter).

"Having obtained and not obtained (prāpya-aprapaka) relationship (sambandha), nature (svarūpa) is explained (abhinirūpaṇam)."

"The explanation of the nature of the relationship between attainment and non-attainment."

प्रधानार्थस्तु तद्युग्मकैट्कर्यस्य प्रधानता ।।४३।।

pradhānārthastu tadyugmakaiṭkaryasya pradhānatā ।।43।।

pradhānārthaḥ (pradhān + artha, tatpuruṣa, nominative singular masculine),
tu (indeclinable),
tad (demonstrative pronoun, nominative singular neuter),
yugma (compound noun, nominative singular neuter),
kaiṭkarya (kaiṭkarya, genitive singular masculine),
asya (possessive pronoun, genitive singular masculine),
pradhānatā (pradhānata, abstract noun, nominative singular feminine).

"But (tu), the essential meaning (pradhānārtha) is the predominance (pradhānatā) of that (tad) paired troublesome effect (yugma kaiṭkarya)."

"But the primary meaning is the predominance of that paired troublesome effect."

स्वदोषाभ्यनुसन्धानमनुसन्ध्यर्थ उच्यते ।

svadoṣābhyanusandhānamanusandhyartha ucyate ।

svadoṣa (svadoṣa, nominative singular masculine),
abhy-anusandhānam (compound, accusative singular neuter),
anusandhyartha (compound noun, nominative singular masculine),
ucyate (present passive, third person singular).

"Self-defect (svadoṣa) investigation (abhy-anusandhānam) for the purpose (artha) of connection (anusandhi) is said (ucyate)."

"This is called the investigation of one's own defect for establishing connection."

एवमेवानुसन्धेयं मोक्षकामैरहर्दिवम् ।।४४।। 

evamevānusandheyaṁ mokṣakāmairahardivam ।

evam eva (indeclinable),
anusandheyam (verbal noun, accusative singular neuter),
mokṣakāmaiḥ (mokṣa + kāma, instrumental plural masculine),
ahardivam (ahardiva, accusative singular neuter).

"Thus (evam eva) the connection (anusandheyam) should be made (gerund) by those desiring liberation (mokṣakāmaiḥ) day and night (ahardivam)."

"Thus the investigation should be pursued by liberation-desiring people day and night."
