SOURCE_PAGES: page_0179.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


लोकसङ्ग्रहणार्थन्तु श्रुतिचोदितकर्मणाम् ।
शोषभूतैरनुष्ठानं
तत्कैङ्र्यपरायणैः ।।११३।।

lokasaṅgrahaṇārthantu śruticodeitakarmaṇām |
śoṣabhūtairanuṣṭhānaṃ
tatkaiṅryaparaāyaiḥ ||113||

लोकसङ्ग्रहणार्थन्तु (lokasaṅgrahaṇa-arthantu): loka-saṅgrahaṇa-artha-ntu; loka (लोक) m. ‘world’ (noun, masculine, singular, nominative), saṅgrahaṇa (सङ्ग्रहण) m. ‘collection, preservation’ (noun, masculine, singular, genitive, tatpuruṣa compound: loka-saṅgrahaṇa), artha (अर्थ) m. ‘purpose, cause’ (noun, masculine, singular, dative), anuṭ (a verbal root suffix used to express purpose): indeclinable suffix; the whole compound means ‘for the purpose of world-preservation’; tu (तु) indeclinable particle ‘indeed’ or ‘let it be so’.

श्रुतिचोदितकर्मणाम् (śruticodeitakarmaṇām): śruti (श्रुति) f. ‘scripture, revealed text’ (noun, feminine, singular, genitive), utodeita (compound of ud + īta, with 'cit' verbal root meaning ‘to awaken, to inspire’): here śruticodita is a tatpuruṣa compound meaning ‘inspired by śruti’, karmaṇām (कर्मणाम्) n. ‘of actions’ (noun, neuter, plural, genitive); together ‘of the actions inspired by śruti’.

शोषभूतैरनुष्ठानं (śoṣabhūtairanuṣṭhānam): śoṣa (शोष) m. ‘drying, exhaustion’ noun base, bhūta (भूत) adjective ‘become, having become’, together forming an adjective ‘having become exhausted/dried up’, -aiḥ instrumental plural; anuṣṭhānam (अनुष्ठानं) n. ‘performance, execution’ (noun, neuter, singular, nominative); 'performance by the exhausted ones' or 'performance done by those having become exhausted'.

तत्कैङ्र्यपरायणैः (tatkaiṅryaparaāyaiḥ): tat (तत्) pronoun ‘that’, kaiṅrya (कैङ्र्य) m. ‘supremacy, sovereignty’ (noun, masculine, singular, genitive), parāyaṇa (परायण) m. ‘devoted’ adjective (m. pl. instr.) ‘with those devoted’, here parāyaṇaiḥ instrumental plural masculine; ‘with those wholly devoted to that sovereignty’.

Literal translation (close):  
Let it be for the purpose of world-preservation of actions inspired by śruti; the performance (anuṣṭhānam) by those exhausted/dried-up (śoṣabhūtaiḥ); with those devoted (parāyaṇaiḥ) to that sovereignty (kaiṅrya).

Smooth English translation:  
Let the performance of actions inspired by the scriptures, carried out by those who are fully dedicated and have endured hardship, be for the purpose of preserving the world.
