SOURCE_PAGES: page_0278.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


तोताद्रिसञ्ज्ञादिषु वैष्णवोत्तमैरेवं तथा तुङ्शयादिकं प्रभुम्।
कार्यो निवासो नितरां शुभार्थिभिराराधयद्धिः सकलार्थदायिनम् ।।२००।।

totādrisañjñādiṣu vaiṣṇavottamairevaṁ tathā tuṅśayādikaṁ prabhum
kāryo nivāso nitarāṁ śubhārthibhirārādhayaddhiḥ sakalārthadāyinam

तोताद्रिसञ्ज्ञादिषु (totādrisañjñādiṣu): tota-ādri-sañjñā-ādiṣu; tatpuruṣa; locative plural neuter; "in those called Totadri and similar"
वैष्णवोत्तमैः (vaiṣṇavottamaiḥ): vaiṣṇava-uttam-āḥ; instrumental plural masculine; tatpuruṣa compound; "by the best of the Vaiṣṇavas"
एवं (evaṁ): indeclinable; "thus"
तथा (tathā): indeclinable; "also"
तुङ्शयादिकं (tuṅśayādikaṁ): tuṅśaya-ādikaṁ; bahuvrīhi; accusative singular masculine; "Tuṅśaya and others"
प्रभुम् (prabhum): prabhu; accusative singular masculine; "the Lord"

कार्यः (kāryaḥ): kārya; nominative singular masculine; "to be done"
निवासः (nivāsaḥ): nivāsa; nominative singular masculine; "dwelling"
नितरां (nitarāṁ): adverb; "exceedingly"
शुभार्थिभिः (śubhārthibhiḥ): śubha-artha-bhiḥ; instrumental plural masculine; "by auspicious-minded ones"
आराधयत् (ārādhayat): verb; root आराध्, 3rd person singular imperfect active; "was worshipping"
धिः (dhiḥ): dhiḥ; noun nominative singular feminine; "intellect" or "mind"
सकलार्थदायिनम् (sakalārthadāyinam): sakala-artha-dāyinam; accusative singular masculine; tatpuruṣa; "giver of all benefits"

"तोताद्रिसञ्ज्ञादिषु" - in those called Totadri and others (locative plural neuter, tatpuruṣa)  
"वैष्णवोत्तमैः" - by the best Vaiṣṇavas (instr. pl. m., tatpuruṣa)  
"एवं" - thus (indeclinable)  
"तथा" - also (indeclinable)  
"तुङ्शयादिकं" - Tuṅśaya and others (acc. sg. m., bahuvrīhi)  
"प्रभुम्" - the Lord (acc. sg. m.)  

"कार्यः" - to be done (nom. sg. m.)  
"निवासः" - dwelling (nom. sg. m.)  
"नितरां" - exceedingly (adverb)  
"शुभार्थिभिः" - by auspicious-minded ones (instr. pl. m.)  
"आराधयत्" - was worshipping (3rd sing. impf. act.)  
"धिः" - mind/intellect (nom. sg. f.)  
"सकलार्थदायिनम्" - giver of all benefits (acc. sg. m., tatpuruṣa)  

In those (places) known as Totadri and such, by the best Vaiṣṇavas, thus also Tuṅśaya and others worshipped the Lord.  
To be done is a dwelling exceedingly worshipped by auspicious-minded ones, the intellect (mind) as the giver of all benefits.

In places known as Totadri and others, the best Vaiṣṇavas and likewise Tuṅśaya and others worshipped the Lord.  
The abode, to be established, is greatly worshipped by virtuous devotees, the mind granting all benefits.
