SOURCE_PAGES: page_0106.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


इति प्रतिपदमर्थसङ्ग्रहः।  
अत्रोपायान्तरस्याथी निवृत्तिः प्रतिपाद्यते ।  
सकृदित्येवकारेण तूपायनिरपेक्षता ।।४६ ।।  
प्रपत्रायेतिपदतस्तूपायस्थानमुच्यते ।  
उपायत्वं भगवतस्तवेति पदतस्तथा ।।४७।।

iti pratipadamarthasaṅgrahaḥ।  
atropāyāntarasya athī nivṛttiḥ pratipādyate।  
sakṛdityevakāreṇa tūpāyanirapekṣatā।।46।।  
prapatrāyetipadatas tūpāyasthānamucyate।  
upāyatvaṃ bhagavatas tave ti padatastathā।।47।।

इति (iti) – indeclinable, particle (thus, so)  
प्रतिपदम् (pratipadam) – प्रतिपद्, accusative singular neuter (object: "word/term")  
अर्थसङ्‌ग्रहः (arthasaṅgrahaḥ) – अर्थ-सङ्ग्रहः, nominative singular masculine (compound: tatpuruṣa; "collection of meanings")  
अत्र (atra) – indeclinable, adverb ("here")  
उपायान्तरस्य (upāyāntarasya) – उपाय-अन्तरस्, genitive singular masculine (compound: tatpuruṣa; "of another method/means")  
अथी (athī) – अथ, indeclinable, particle ("then")  
निवृत्तिः (nivṛttiḥ) – निवृत्ति, nominative singular feminine ("cessation, conclusion")  
प्रतिपाद्यते (pratipādyate) – verb root प्रदा, present passive/mediopassive, 3rd singular ("is expounded")  
सकृद् (sakṛd) – indeclinable, adverb ("once")  
इति (iti) – indeclinable, particle ("thus")  
एव (eva) – indeclinable, particle ("indeed")  
कारेण (kāreṇa) – कार, instrumental singular masculine ("by the form")  
तूपायनिरपेक्षता (tūpāyanirapekṣatā) – तूपाय-निरपेक्षता, nominative singular feminine (compound: tatpuruṣa; "absence of dependence on the perfect means")  
प्रपत्रायेतिपदतस् (prapatrāyetipadatas) – compound, likely tatpuruṣa (unclear segmentation)  
तूपायस्थानम् (tūpāyasthānam) – तूपाय-स्थानम्, accusative singular neuter (compound: tatpuruṣa; "place of perfect means")  
उच्यते (ucyate) – verb root उच्, present passive 3rd singular ("is called")  
उपायत्वं (upāyatvaṃ) – उपायत्वं, accusative singular neuter ("the state of being a means")  
भगवतः (bhagavataḥ) – भगवत्, genitive singular masculine ("of the blessed Lord")  
त्वे (tve) – unclear; likely तव (tava), possessive pronoun, genitive or locative singular ("your")  
इति (iti) – indeclinable particle ("thus")  
पदतः (padataḥ) – पदतस्, genitive singular masculine (compound tatpuruṣa)  
तथा (tathā) – indeclinable, particle ("so")  

(Notes: Some compound words like "प्रपत्रायेतिपदतस्" and "त्वेति" appear ambiguous or responsive to textual peculiarities. "त्वेति" here is segmented as "त्वे" + "ति", possibly a variant or typo for "तवेति".)

Literal translation:  
Thus, the collection of meanings for each term.  
Here, the cessation of an internal (alternative) means is expounded.  
By the form "once indeed," the absence of dependence on the perfect means (tūpāya) (is explained). (46)  
The perfect means' place is called "prapatrāyetipadatas."  
The state of being a means (upāyatva) is thus of the Blessed Lord, and thus it is for the term. (47)

Smooth English translation:  
Thus is the collection of meanings for each term.  
Here, the cessation of a secondary means is explained.  
The quality of "once indeed" denotes independence from the perfect means. (46)  
The place of the perfect means is called "prapatrāyetipadatas."  
The quality of being a means pertains to the Blessed Lord, and similarly to the term. (47)
