SOURCE_PAGES: page_0130.txt

=== मूलपाठः ===


महदतिक्रमश्चात्र हेयताबीजम्।
हीनाङ्घो ह्यधिकाङ्घश्च कपटी कृष्णदन्तवान् ।
नेत्ररोगी च कुष्ठी च वावद्रूकश्च वामनः ।।६५।।
व्यसनी बहुनिद्रश्च कुनखो बहुभोजनः 1
नेशो देशिको योग्यो मुमुक्षीर्मुक्तिसाधने ।। ६६ ।।

mahadatikramaścātra heyatābījam।
hīnāṅgho hyadhikāṅghaśca kapaṭī kṛṣṇadantavān ।
netrarogī ca kuṣṭhī ca vāvadrūkśca vāmanaḥ ॥65॥
vyasanī bahunidraśca kunakho bahubhojanaḥ 1
neśo deśiko yogyo mumuṣīrmuktisādhane ॥ 66 ॥

महद् (mahad) - महत् (adj. neuter singular nominative/accusative: great, large)  
अतिक्रमः (atikramaḥ) - अतिक्रम (masculine singular nominative: transgression, exceeding)  
च (ca) - च (indeclinable conjunction: and)  
अत्र (ātra) - अत्र (indeclinable adverb: here)  
हेय (heya) - हेय (indeclinable adjective: to be abandoned, to be rejected)  
ताबीजम् (tābījam) - ताबीज (neuter singular nominative/accusative: seed, cause)  

हीनाङ्घः (hīnāṅghaḥ) - हीनाङ्घ (masculine singular nominative: defective person missing limb)  
ह्य् (hy) - हि (indeclinable particle: surely, indeed)  
अधिकाङ्घः (adhikāṅghaḥ) - अधिकाङ्घ (masculine singular nominative: person with excess limbs)  
च (ca) - च (and)  
कपटी (kapaṭī) - कपटी (masculine singular nominative: deceiver, hypocrite)  
कृष्ण-दन्तवान् (kṛṣṇa-dantavān) - कृष्ण-दन्तवान् (masculine singular nominative: having black teeth)  

नेत्र-रोगी (netrarogī) - नेत्र-रोगी (masculine singular nominative: one afflicted with eye disease)  
च (ca) - च (and)  
कुष्ठी (kuṣṭhī) - कुष्ठी (masculine singular nominative: one afflicted with leprosy)  
च (ca) - च (and)  
वावद्रूकः (vāvadrūkaḥ) - वावद्रूक (masculine singular nominative: one affected with scabies)  
च (ca) - च (and)  
वामनः (vāmanaḥ) - वामन (masculine singular nominative: a dwarf)  

व्यसनी (vyasanī) - व्यसनी (masculine singular nominative: addicted)  
बहुनिद्रः (bahunidraḥ) - बहुनिद्रा (masculine singular nominative: one who sleeps much)  
च (ca) - च (and)  
कुनखः (kunakhaḥ) - कुनख (masculine singular nominative: one afflicted with leprosy)  
बहु-भोजनः (bahubhojanaḥ) - बहुभोजन (masculine singular nominative: one who eats much)  

नेशः (neśaḥ) - नेश (masculine singular nominative: lord, ruler)  
देशिकः (deśikaḥ) - देशिक (masculine singular nominative: teacher)  
योग्यः (yogyaḥ) - योग्य (masculine singular nominative: fit, proper)  
मुमुक्षीः (mumuṣīḥ) - मुमुक्षी (masculine singular nominative: aspirant for liberation)  
मुक्ति-साधने (mukti-sādhane) - मुक्ति-साधन (masculine singular locative singular: for liberation attainment)

Great transgressions here are seeds to be abandoned (हेयताबीजम्);  
A defective person, indeed an excessive person, and a deceitful one with black teeth;  
One afflicted with eye disease, one with leprosy, one with scabies, and a dwarf;  
Addicted ones, heavy sleepers, lepers, and gluttons;  
The lord, the teacher—who is worthy, an aspirant for liberation in the attainment of liberation.

Here, great transgressions are seeds to be rejected;  
The defective, the excessive, the deceitful black-toothed one;  
The eye patient, the leper, the scabbed, and the dwarf;  
The addicted, the heavy sleeper, the leper, and the glutton;  
The lord, the teacher, the worthy one, the aspirant engaged in liberation.

Here, great transgressions are seeds to be abandoned.  
Those who are defective, excessive, deceitful, black-toothed,  
Those suffering from eye diseases, leprosy, scabies, or dwarfism,  
Addicts, heavy sleepers, lepers, and gluttons—  
Only the lord, the teacher, the worthy aspirant can engage in the attainment of liberation.
